..
.. Copyright  (C) 2025 The Icecube Collaboration
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
..
.. @date $LastChangedDate: 22nd September 2025 $
.. @author Tom Stuttard

.. highlight:: pycon

.. _upgrade_launch_classes-main:

IceCube Upgrade launch/hit classes
==================================

This page gives a brief introduction to the dataclasses containing the raw
output data from the IceCube Upgrade OMs, known as *launches*. These launch
classes are populated via decoding of raw data in the case of real detector
operations, or by the :cpp:class:`DOMLauncher` project in simulations.

The main reference document for the output data format is the
`xDOMApp Reference Manual <https://github.com/WIPACrepo/STM32Workspace/tree/master/xdomapp/docs>`__.


I3XDOMHit
^^^^^^^^^

:cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit` contains an extracted pulse (single photoelectron) from
the readout of an OM running XDOMApp, such as an mDOM, DEgg or PDOM, for a
single channel/PMT. It is the result of the on-board waveform extraction. If
this extraction fails, a *launch* dataclass of the relevant OM type will
instead be filled (details below).

Members
-------

**Time**

The feature extracted time of the single photoelectron.

**Charge**

The feature extracted charge of the single photoelectron, in units of
photoelectrons (p.e.).

**LC**

Indicates if a *local coincidence* condition was flagged by the module. There
are several types of LC possible for Upgrade modules:

 - Onboard LC: Used solely for the noise suppression algorithm, this only looks
   at PMTs on the same module. This type of LC is only valid for mDOMs.
 - Single-module LC: This looks at PMTs on the same module, but can have
   different settings than the onboard LC.
 - Multi-module LC: This is similar to Gen1's LC where we check if neighboring
   modules see hits in a time window.
 - DEgg-inclusive LC: A proposal pursued by Chiba folks where we require at
   least one module of each LC pair to be on a DEgg. This is intended to reduce
   LC noise, since DEggs have lower noise rates than mDOMs.
 - DEgg-exclusive LC: A local coincidence mode where ONLY DEggs may contribute.
 - Non-Uniform LC: A specialized LC where mDOM+mDOM, mDOM+DEgg, and DEgg+DEgg
   may use different settings.

Note that only the first type of local coincidence is applied onboard the detector.
The remainder are produced in software during triggering. In simulation, these
flags are generated by :cpp:class:`MultiPMTCoincify` in :ref:`phys-services <phys-services>`.


I3DEggLaunch
^^^^^^^^^^^^

:cpp:class:`I3DEggLaunch` contains the output data from the DEgg, for a single
channel/PMT. It includes an instance of the common :cpp:class:`I3XDOMLaunch`
class. Note that this class is only returned when on-board waveform extraction
fails, otherwise :cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit` is returned.

The PDOM also outputs this dataclass, since it shares the same frontend
electronics as the DEgg. For convenience, the ``typedef``
:cpp:type:`I3PDOMLaunch` are also provided.

Members
-------

**Time**

The time (in nanoseconds) of the 240 MHz ADC bin in which the launch is
triggered (for this channel/PMT). Note that this is *not* the time of the first
ADC sample, since there are some recorded samples before the trigger (see
``NPreSamples``).

The time is marked as *valid* if the timestamp is synchronized with the ICM
clock, otherwise it is *invalid* (check this using ``HasValidTime``).

**ADCData**

The ADC counts for each sample recorded, e.g. the waveform. The sampling is
240 MHz. May be delta-compressed.

**BaselineValue**

The baseline counts of the ADC, which is calculated continuously by the FPGA
as a rolling sum. It can be marked as *valid* or *invalid*.

**NPreSamples**

The number of ADC samples recorded before the trigger (configurable).

**FEXResult**

Status of the on-board waveform extraction. Note that if the extraction is
successful, an ``I3XDOMHit`` object is returned instead of an
``I3DEggLaunch``.

**SelectionType**

Indicates if this waveform was selected by minimum bias.


I3mDOMLaunch
^^^^^^^^^^^^

:cpp:class:`I3mDOMLaunch` contains the output data from an mDOM readout, for a
single channel/PMT. It includes an instance of the common
:cpp:class:`I3XDOMLaunch` class. Note that this class is only returned when
on-board waveform extraction fails, otherwise :cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit` is
returned.

Members
-------

**Time**

The time (in nanoseconds) of the 120 MHz ADC bin in which the launch is
triggered (for this channel/PMT). Note that this is *not* the time of the first
ADC sample, since there are some recorded samples before the trigger (see
``NPreSamples``).

The time is marked as *valid* if the timestamp is synchronized with the ICM
clock, otherwise it is *invalid* (check this using ``HasValidTime``).

**ADCData**

The ADC counts for each sample recorded, e.g. the waveform. The sampling is
120 MHz. May be delta-compressed.

**BaselineValue**

The baseline counts of the ADC, which is calculated continuously by the FPGA
as a rolling sum. It can be marked as *valid* or *invalid*.

**NPreSamples**

The number of ADC samples recorded before the trigger (configurable).

**TOTHits**

A vector of :cpp:class:`TOTHit` instances gives a simplified representation of
the 960 MHz discriminator waveform. Each :cpp:class:`TOTHit` represents a
single *low-to-high* crossing of the discriminator threshold, and has two
members; ``Time`` (the time that the discriminator threshold is crossed in the leading edge) and ``TOT``
(*time-over-threshold*, e.g. the time duration the discriminator remains over threshold). These two 
variables thus give the transition times of the discriminator logic waveform.

**FEXResult**

Status of the on-board waveform extraction. Note that if the extraction is
successful, an ``I3XDOMHit`` object is returned instead of an
``I3mDOMLaunch``.

**SelectionType**

Indicates if this waveform was selected by minimum bias.

**TriggerType**

Indicates what caused the mDOM channel/PMT to trigger and create this launch.
Typically this is the *discriminator*, but *ADC threshold*, *software* or
*external* triggering are also options.


NoiseSuppressionRecord
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The high rates of radioactive decay noise in the mDOMs mean that not all mDOM
hit data can be transmitted to the surface. Events with two or more hits in a
given PMT channel within an exclusion time window, but without a corresponding
local-coincidence hit in a different PMT channel, are flagged as correlated
noise events. If a correlated noise event is detected, all subsequent hits
within the exclusion time window following the first hit are suppressed, and a
record is sent in the output data stream.

The noise suppression code also generates it's own local coincidence flags,
represented by :py:attr:`dataclasses.UpgradeLCFlags.OnboardLC`. These flags are only
used for coincidences between PMTs within a single mDOM during the noise
suppression algorithm.

Members
-------

**Time**

The start time of the exclusion window.

**NNoiseHits**

The number of hits (more specifically, rising discriminator edges) within the
exclusion window (which are expected to be noise).

**ExclusionWindowSize**

The configured time window to exclude once the noise suppression condition is
triggered.

**LCWindowSize**

The configured time window within which two hits are considered to be in
coincidence.


I3LOMLaunch
^^^^^^^^^^^^

:cpp:class:`I3LOMLaunch` contains the output data from the LOM, for a single 
channel/PMT. This dataclass is used regardless of the LOM variant, e.g. 
LOM-16 vs LOM-18.

**Important:** This is a very preliminary implementation acting as a 
placeholder, as the LOM readout electronics are not yet fully developed. 
Expect this dataclass to change substantially over time.  

Members
-------

**Time**

The time (in nanoseconds) of the 60 MHz ADC bin in which the launch is
triggered (for this channel/PMT). Note that this is *not* the time of the 
first ADC sample, since there are some recorded samples before the trigger.

The time is marked as *valid* if the timestamp is synchronized with the 
ICM clock, otherwise it is *invalid* (check this using ``HasValidTime``).

The readout is triggered by an analog circuit if the high gain channel 
exceeds  a threshold voltage equivalent to 0.2 photoelectrons.


**ADCDataHighGain/LowGain**

The ADC counts for each sample recorded, e.g. the waveforms. There are
two distinct channels, one with high and one with low gain, each returning 
a waveform. The two waveforms always have the same length, typically approx. 
30 samples (5 of which are before the trigger) but can be longer for 
large/complex signals, and are concurrent (e.g. triggered at the same time). 
The sampling rate is 60 MHz. 

The high gain channel is set such that it can observe single photoelectrons, 
whilst the low gain channel is suited to much brighter events that would 
saturate the high gain channel. The low gain chain has opposite polarity to 
the high gain channel.


UpgradeReadout
==============

This class provides a common interface for Upgrade readout-like objects that do
not share a common inheritance structure in C++. Internally, it acts as a wrapper
for the underlying object using ``std::variant``. This interface is defined for
three readout classes at the moment: :cpp:class:`I3DEggLaunch`, :cpp:class:`I3mDOMLaunch`,
and :cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit`. Additional classes may be added in the future.

C++ Interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. highlight:: c++

The interface for the :cpp:class:`UpgradeReadout` class is intended to be a
simplified version of the wrapped readout classes. This class can be constructed
using an :cpp:enum:`I3OMGeo::OMType` and one of :cpp:class:`I3DEggLaunch`,
:cpp:class:`I3mDOMLaunch`, or :cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit`. ::

   auto readout1 = UpgradeReadout(I3mDOMLaunch(...), I3OMGeo::OMType::mDOM);
   auto readout2 = UpgradeReadout(I3DEggLaunch(...), I3OMGeo::OMType::DEgg);
   auto readout3 = UpgradeReadout(I3XDOMHit(...), I3OMGeo::OMType::mDOM);
   auto readout4 = UpgradeReadout(I3XDOMHit(...), I3OMGeo::OMType::DEgg);

We explicitly set the :cpp:enum:`I3OMGeo::OMType` here to enable users to
filter based on hit types. For example, a user may wish to produce a vector of
:cpp:class:`UpgradeReadout` from both :cpp:type:`I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap` and
onboard extracted DEgg hits from the :cpp:type:`I3XDOMHitSeriesMap`. This
is used explicitly in the Upgrade's local coincidence simulation as well,
where we (optionally) have LC flags that differentiate between mDOM and DEgg
hits.

**Time and LCFlags**

This class exposes two properties of the underlying launch/hit: the time (via
:cpp:func:`UpgradeReadout::GetTime`) and LC flags (:cpp:func:`UpgradeReadout::GetLCFlags`).

   **double GetTime() const**
      Get the time returned by the underlying hit's ``GetTime()`` function.

   **UpgradeLCFlags GetLCFlags()**
      Get the current LC flags of the wrapped hit.

Functionally, these are defined using ``std::visit`` calls in the header file.
For example, the ``GetTime()`` function is defined as::

   double GetTime() const{
     return std::visit([](auto const& x){return x.GetTime();}, launch);
   }

This dispatches the call from the :cpp:class:`UpgradeReadout` to the underlying
type in the contained launch/hit. This allows us to have a common, unified
interface for accessing the times and LC flags for the three contained types.

.. attention::
   The definition of "time" may differ between the :cpp:class:`I3DEggLaunch`/
   :cpp:class:`I3mDOMLaunch` (where it refers to the first discriminator crossing
   of the full waveform) and :cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit` (where it refers to the time
   of the pulse peak). If this distinction matters for your applications, tread
   carefully when using `GetTime` or consider defining your own visitor function.

Additional ``std::visit`` functions may be added to the code as needed, but
take care to ensure all types in the ``std::variant`` are covered in any new
visitation functions. The compiler will complain if any calls aren't available.

The class includes several additional utility functions related to the Upgrade local
coincidence flags.

  .. function:: ResetLCFlags(UpgradeLCFlags flags)

    Set the launch's LC flags matching the specified flags to false

  .. function:: AddLCFlags(UpgradeLCFlags flags)

    Set the launch's LC flags matching the specified flags to true

  .. function:: SetLCFlags(UpgradeLCFlags flags)

    Set all of the launch's LC flags to match specified values

**Helper Functions**

In addition to the time and charge, the :cpp:class:`UpgradeReadout` includes
several helper functions to hide some of the complexity of ``std::variant``
calls. Each of these will be discussed briefly.

 .. function:: template <typename T> bool Contains() const

   This function allows the user to determine whether the contained launch/hit
   is of the specified type.

These can be used for each of the types with specific template parameters. For
example::

   bool is_degg_launch = readout.Contains<I3DEggLaunch>();
   bool is_mdom_launch = readout.Contains<I3mDOMLaunch>();
   bool is_xdom_hit    = readout.Contains<I3XDOMHit>();

We can also directly try to grab the underlying hit:

 .. function:: template <typename T> T* Get() const

    If the underlying hit is of type ``T``, return a pointer to the hit. Otherwise,
    return nullptr.

This is a light wrapper around ``std::get_if<T>``. Here, we can conditionally
obtain a pointer to the underlying launch (in the original type), but only if
the original type matches the template parameter ``T``. For example, this next
block of code will succeed, yielding a valid pointer to an :cpp:class:`I3DEggLaunch`. ::

   auto readout = UpgradeReadout(I3OMGeo::OMType::DEgg, I3DEggLaunch(...))
   I3DEggLaunch* launch = readout.Get<I3DEggLaunch>()

The next block will result in ``launch`` being set to ``nullptr``, since the contained
launch/hit is not an :cpp:class:`I3DEggLaunch`. ::

   auto readout = UpgradeReadout(I3OMGeo::OMType::DEgg, I3XDOMHit(...))
   I3DEggLaunch* launch = readout.Get<I3DEggLaunch>()

This can be useful if you need to handle each type of underlying readout
differently. ::

   if(I3DEggLaunch* launch = readout.Get<I3DEggLaunch>())
     { ... code for I3DEggLaunch ... }
   else if(I3mDOMLaunch* launch = readout.Get<I3mDOMLaunch>())
     { ... code for I3mDOMLaunch ... }
   else if(I3XDOMHit* hit = readout.Get<I3XDOMHit>())
     { ... code for I3XDOMHit ... }
   else
     {log_fatal("UpgradeReadout's type was not of the three specified types!");}

**Dealing with Maps**

The :cpp:class:`UpgradeReadout` class includes typedefs for :cpp:type:`UpgradeReadoutSeries`
and :cpp:type:`UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap` just like other IceCube readout classes. These
interfaces act like other :cpp:class:`I3Map` objects. ::

   UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap readoutMap;
   readoutMap[OMKey(88, 41, 1)] = UpgradeReadoutSeries();
   readoutMap[OMKey(88, 41, 1)].push_back(UpgradeReadout(...));

   for(const auto& [omkey, readouts] : readoutMap){
       for(const auto& readout : readouts){
           double time = readout.GetTime();
           ...
       }
   }

These can be created with another helper function defined in the same namespace. ::

   template<typename T> static UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap From(const T& inputMap, I3OMGeoMap omgeoMap)

This static function can be used to build an :cpp:type:`UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap`
directly from an :cpp:type:`I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap`, :cpp:type:`I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap`,
or :cpp:type:`I3XDOMHitSeriesMap`. These may be combined with :cpp:func:`UpgradeReadout::Merge`. ::

   auto mdomConstMap = frame->Get<I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMapConstPtr>(...);
   auto deggConstMap = frame->Get<I3DEggLaunchSeriesMapConstPtr>(...);
   auto xdomConstMap = frame->Get<I3XDOMHitSeriesMapConstPtr>(...);

   UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap readoutMap =
          UpgradeReadout::Merge(UpgradeReadout::From<I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap>(*mdomConstMap, omgeoMap),
                                UpgradeReadout::From<I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap>(*deggConstMap, omgeoMap),
                                UpgradeReadout::From<I3XDOMHitSeriesMap>(*xdomConstMap, omgeoMap));

This will result in a single, unified time-sorted map object that may be iterated through
similar to other hitmaps in IceCube. The :cpp:func:`UpgradeReadout::Merge` is a variadic function
and can accept an arbitrary number of input :cpp:func:`UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap`.

.. warning::
   Using ``std::map::merge`` will not throw an error, but it will not combine hit series
   from multiple sources if the occur on a single PMT. If you combine :cpp:type:`I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap`
   /:cpp:type:`I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap` with :cpp:type:`I3XDOMHitSeriesMap`, this will
   result in a merged map that is missing hits! **Always** use the :cpp:func:`UpgradeReadout::Merge`
   function instead.

.. code-block:: c++

   template<typename T> static T To(const UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap& readoutMap)

The :cpp:func:`UpgradeReadout::To` static function works the opposite direction, converting an existing
:cpp:type:`UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap` to the specified template type ``T`` by extracting
all readouts of the correct type. ::

   UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap readoutMap;
   // ...
   I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap deggMap = UpgradeReadout::To<I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap>(readoutMap);
   I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap mdomMap = UpgradeReadout::To<I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap>(readoutMap);
   I3XDOMHitSeriesMap    xdomMap = UpgradeReadout::To<I3XDOMHitSeriesMap>(readoutMap);

.. attention::
   The underlying types are **not** "converted" here. We're simply pulling
   objects out into their **original** types. If a hit went in as an :cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit`,
   it will not come out when you run ``UpgradeReadout::To<I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap>``.


Python Interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. highlight:: pycon

In Python, the constructor is overloaded and accepts one of the supported
readout types:

  .. py:method:: UpgradeReadout(I3DEggLaunch, omtype)
                 UpgradeReadout(I3mDOMLaunch, omtype)
                 UpgradeReadout(I3XDOMHit, omtype)

     Construct an :cpp:class:`UpgradeReadout` to wrap either an:
     :cpp:class:`I3DEggLaunch`, :cpp:class:`I3mDOMLaunch`, or an :cpp:class:`I3XDOMHit`

The time and local coincidence flags are available as attributes from the
python object

 .. py:attribute:: time
    :type: float

    The readout time, obtained from the underlying object via its
    ``GetTime()`` method.

 .. py:attribute:: lc_flags
    :type: UpgradeLCFlags

    Local coincidence (LC) flags associated with the readout.

Like in C++, methods are included for checking the underlying type and
retrieving the wrapped object.

  .. py:method:: is_I3DEggLaunch() -> bool

     Check whether the wrapped hit is an I3DEggLaunch.

  .. py:method:: is_I3mDOMLaunch() -> bool

     Check whether the wrapped hit is an I3mDOMLaunch.

  .. py:method:: is_I3XDOMHit() -> bool

     Check whether the wrapped hit is an I3XDOMHit.

  .. py:method:: get_I3DEggLaunch() -> I3DEggLaunch | None

     If the wrapped hit is an I3DEggLaunch, return the I3DEggLaunch. If
     the wrapped hit is another type, this function will return None.

  .. py:method:: get_I3mDOMLaunch() -> I3mDOMLaunch | None

     If the wrapped hit is an I3mDOMLaunch, return the I3mDOMLaunch. If
     the wrapped hit is another type, this function will return None.

  .. py:method:: get_I3XDOMHit() -> I3XDOMHit | None

     If the wrapped hit is an I3XDOMHit, return the I3XDOMHit. If
     the wrapped hit is another type, this function will return None.

The :py:class:`UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap` is also exposed, allowing users
to build their own map objects. Like in C++, the :py:class:`UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap`
can be built directly from the maps of the various types. As in other cases
of hitmaps, these maps include a :py:type:`dict` interface. Maps can be combined
with a dedicated ``merge`` function.

  >>> readoutMap = UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap()
  >>> readoutMap.merge(UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap(degg_map, omgeo))
  >>> readoutMap.merge(UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap(mdom_map, omgeo))
  >>> readoutMap.merge(UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap(xdom_map, omgeo))

.. warning::
   Using ``dict.update`` will not throw an error, but it will not combine hit series
   from multiple sources if the occur on a single PMT. If you combine :cpp:type:`I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap`
   /:cpp:type:`I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap` with :cpp:type:`I3XDOMHitSeriesMap`, this will
   result in a merged map that is missing hits! **Always** use the ``UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap.merge``
   function instead.

The :py:class:`UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap` includes functions to extract hits
to their original types as well.

  >>> degg_map = readoutMap.to_I3DEggLaunchSeriesMap()
  >>> mdom_map = readoutMap.to_I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap()
  >>> xdom_map = readoutMap.to_I3XDOMHitSeriesMap()


**Usage Example**

.. code-block:: python

   # Construct from different input maps
   readout_map = UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap(omgeo, mdom_map)
   readout_map2 = UpgradeReadoutSeriesMap(omgeo, degg_map)

   # Merge maps
   readout_map.update(readout_map2)

   # Access data
   for omkey, series in readout_map.items():
       for readout in series:
           print(readout.time, readout.lc_flags)

   # Convert back to specific types
   mdom_out = readout_map.to_I3mDOMLaunchSeriesMap()
