=============
Documentation
=============

This page describes provides an overview of the IceTray documentation system.
Because of IceTray's modular design, and the fact that documentation is provided
from number of different sources, it can be quite complicated.
The is system uses `sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`_ to translate these
different sources into html.
``sphinx`` was originally developed to be the documentation system for python, but
has developed support for many languages.
There are four main sources for documentation:

* restructured text (``rst``) -- for writing high level descriptions of the code
* sphinx python -- automatically documents python code based on the code and
  provided comments
* doxygen -- parses c and c++ code and automatically produces documentation
  and creates documentation based on the code and provided comments
* ``icetray-inspect`` -- analyses IceTray interfaces such as IceTray modules,
  service factories and ``tableio`` readers.

``sphinx`` then combines these into a single group of html files.
Cross references are possible between each of these groups of sources.

Building the docs
=================

Building the entire docs can take quite some time, so they are available at
`<https://docs.icecube.aq/>`_ where they are regularlly updated.  However, it
is often necessary to build the docs yourself.  The docs are build with a
python script called ``docs-build`` which will be available in your path if
you are in an IceTray environment.  If run without any arguments the entire
document will be built which will take some time.  Usually when writing
documentation you will only want to see the docs for one or two projects. This
can be accomplished with:

.. code:: console

   $ ./env-shell.sh docs-build --projects astro bayesian-priors --open

This will only build two projects: astro and baysian-priors.
In addition, the ``--open`` option will open the html file for you in the browser
as soon as the build is complete.
Other wise you will have to find the docs yourself in the directory they are
written to ``$I3_BUILD/docs/build/html/``.

Another useful option is the ``-j`` option which will specify how many parallel
process to run. This is analogous to the ``-j`` option passed to ``make``.
For example if your machine has eight processors you should run ``docs-build -j8``
to run with eight concurrent processes.

Other steps to speed up the build are to skip the sources you are not currently
interested: ``--no-general-docs`` will skip the documents which are not associated
with any project such as the "Basic Info" and "Of General Interest" sections
of the main page. ``--no-project-docs`` will skip the build of project documents
found in each projects ``resources/docs``, ``--no-python`` will skip building the
python docs, ``--no-doxygen`` will prevent reading c/c++ docs with doxygen,
``--no-cpp`` will skip reading the docs generated by doxygen into the documentation
and ``--no-inspect`` will skip examining the IceTray modules to document their
interfaces. For a complete list of options available run ``docs-build --help``.

Writing Documentation
=====================

Project Docs
------------

Each project in ``$I3_SRC`` should contain a ``docs`` directory which will
contain the primary documentation for that project. These docs should serve an
an overview for the project and other information not directly linked to
specific pieces of code. This documentation is written in a format called
ReStructuredText or (``rst``) which is a fairly easy format to learn.
An introduction to ``rst`` can be found at `<https://docutils.sourceforge.io/rst.html>`_.

Many editors also have support for ``rst``: emacs support
can be found at `<https://docutils.sourceforge.io /docs/user/emacs.html>`_.
vim has support with `riv <https://github.com/gu-fan/riv.vim>`_.

References to Autodocs
----------------------

Sphinx comes with an internal
`linking <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#role-ref>`_
system as well as a sophisticated
`cross reference <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/domains.html>`_ system.
Before attempting to write documentation you should familiarize yourself with
this syntax. This section will summarize the basics for cross referencing the
the automatically generated.

To cross reference another project's ``rst`` documentation. You can reference a
project's documentation by filename with ``:doc:`/projects/myproject/index``.
If the project's documentation contains a label in its ``index.rst`` file such
as ``.. _myproject:`` then you can also reference it with ``:ref:`myproject```.

To cross reference the python API reference use sphinx's python domain:
``:py:mod:`icecube.myproject``` for the entire module,
``:py:class:`icecube.mpyroject.myclass``` for classes,
``:py:func:`icecube.myproject.myfunction``` for python functions, and so on and
so forth. The full list of available directives is available at Sphinx's
documentation for
`the-python-domain <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/domains.html#the-python-domain>`_.

To cross reference the C++ documentation provided by breathe can be done either
by path with ``:doc:`/doxygen/myproject/index``` or by label ``:ref:`myproject-cpp```.
Individual classes and struct can be referenced with ``:cpp:class:`MyClass```
and functions with ``:cpp:func:`MyFunction```.
See the complete list of available directives on Sphinx's documentation for
`The C++ Domain <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/domains.html#id2>`_.

To reference the automatically generated ``icetray-inspect`` docs must be done
by path with ``:doc:`/inspect/myproject```. Individual modules and service
factories are referenced by abusing the javascript domain ``:js:data:`MyModule```.

.. Note::

   All of the above examples can be used with a different name for the link.
   For example ``:doc:`/projects/myproject/index`` can be replaced with
   ``:doc:`This is a link to myproject </projects/myproject/index>`` or
   ``:ref:`myproject-cpp``` can be replaced with ``:ref:`This is a link to the
   C++ docs <myproject-cpp>```.

The cross references by path can also be used in toctrees:

.. code-block:: rst
   
  .. toctree::
     :maxdepth: 1
	      
     /python/icecube.myproject
     /doxygen/myproject/index
     /inspect/myproject

Or if you don't like using the titles of the page as the link provide your own:

.. code-block:: rst
   
  .. toctree::
     :maxdepth: 1
	      
     Python API Reference </python/icecube.myproject>
     C++ API Reference </doxygen/myproject/index>
     IceTray Inspect Reference </inspect/myproject>

FAQs About Building the Documentation
=====================================

:Q: While building the docs I see errors like

    .. code-block:: text

        :44: (ERROR/3) Unknown interpreted text role "cpp:class".

:A: You'll generally see errors like this during the two ``icetray-inspect`` phases of the documentation build. They refer to text roles that are compatible with ``sphinx``, but not understood by ``docutils`` (which underpins ``icetray-inspect``). These errors are harmless. Unfortunately there's nothing we can do to suppress or modify them, as they are printed straight to ``stderr`` from deep within ``docutils``.

..

:Q: I want to help fix the docs, but when building I get an opaque wall of text! HELP!

:A: ``docs-build`` and ``icetray-inspect`` both understand rich-text formatting as implemented by the `rich python library <https://github.com/Textualize/rich>`_. All you need to do is install it. The easiest way is via ``pip3``.

    .. code-block:: console

        $ pip3 install rich

    The next time you run ``docs-build`` you'll get organized and colorized output.
